Securing underwater wireless communication networks
Mari Carmen Domingo, Barcelona Tech University
IEEE Wireless Communications, Volume 18, Issue 1


Paper addresses comm security between UUV and sensor network

Channel is difficult,
1) Long Delays
2) Multipath fading
3) doppler. 
4) Error rates are high, 
5) losses of connectivity arise.
6) Power requirements are more stringent (everything is battery operated).

Adversarial problems
1)Packet errors (due to natural channel effects as well as jamming)
2)Eavesdropping
3)Modification of packet
4)Malicious nodes create wormhole effects ( talking via EM channel above the surface)
5)Energy exhaust attacks to drain batteries.



Denial of Service (DOS) attacks and their mitigation
1)Jamming
	-Use spread spectrum techniques
	-FHSS, DSSS

2)Wormhole attack
 	In a wormhole attack the
malicious node transfers some selected packets
received at one end of the wormhole to the
other end using the out-of-band connection, and
re-injects them into the network [4].

	-Use Cognitive radio methods to determine physical separation between actual communication nodes

3)Sinkhole attack
	Malicious node announces a nice direction

4)Others
  HELLO Flood attack
  ACK Spoofing
  Selective Forwarding
  Sybil Attack (pretend to be in many places at once


Security reqts

1) Authentication
	-key generation and update must be updated must be updated to address channel
2) Confidentiality
	-Unauthorized third parties cannot access information
3) Integrity
	-Data sent by nodes must be reliable
4) Availablity
	-Data should be available when needed. Example given: data for seaquakes

Research challenges

1) Secure Time Synchronization
	-Tri-Message is a time synchronization protocol designed for high latency networks

The following open research issues for secure
time synchronization need to be addressed:
• Because of the high and variable propagation
delays of UWCNs, the time required to synchronize
nodes should be investigated.
• Efficient and secure time synchronization

2) Secure Routing


•There is a need to develop reputation-based
schemes that analyze the behavior of neighbors
and reject routing paths containing selfish nodes
that do not cooperate in routing. The proper
functioning of these schemes is challenging
because they do not work well in mobile environments,
the time required to detect compromised
nodes increases substantially in UWCNs due to
the long propagation delays, and they must be
adapted to tolerate short-term disruptions.
•Quick and powerful encryption and authentication
mechanisms against outside intruders
should be devised for UWCNs because the time
required for intruder detection is high due to the
long and variable propagation delays, and routing
paths containing undetected malicious nodes
can be selected in the meantime for packet forwarding.
•Sophisticated mechanisms should be developed
against insider attacks such as selective forwarding,
Sybil attacks, HELLO flood attacks,
and acknowledgment spoofing.
•There is a need to develop new techniques
against sinkholes and wormholes, and improve
existing ones. With Dis-VoW [2] a wormhole
attack can still be concealed by manipulating the
buffering times of distance estimation packets.
The wormhole-resilient neighbor discovery in [5]
is affected by the orientation error between sensors


A Survey of Practical Issues in Underwater Networks
Jim Partan1, Jim Kurose, Brian Neil Levine

Paper focuses on the MAC layer (Media Access Control)

MAC protocol is still an open problem. The network topology will likely remain sparse due to the bigness of the ocean and cost of sensors.

Transmit power dominates (by a factor of 100 sometimes)

Radio waves can be used for short distances (122kHz  for 6-10 m transmitting 1-8kbits/sec)
Optical can get 1-2m at 57.6 kbits/sec

20dB/m pathloss can happen for near-surface with bubble clouds

time delays can be estimated

transducers are frequently used for both send and recieve, but can't do both at once. 

Small AUVs can transmit at high data rates, but have difficulty recieving at high data rates. high data rate is 5kbits/sec at 2km, low data rate is 80 b/sec

higher data rates might use PSK, with equalization and arrays of recievers for diversity. FDMA is occasionally used, Seaweb used hybrid TDMA-CDMA clusters with MACA(Multiple access with Collision Avoidance) style RTS/CTS/DATA handshakes

Collision detection is challenging with half duplex channel.

CDMA can work well if the network is approximately equally balanced powerwise. This has difficulties if there is a near-far problem
